PROSE DESCRIPTIVE QUALITIES SYSTEM
CORE RULES
©2004 Chad Underkoffler
ATOMIC SOCK MONKEY PRESS
< http://www.atomicsockmonkey.com >

PDQ MASTER CHART
LEVEL

As Quality Rank

AS DIFFICULTY RANK

MODIFIER
TO 2D6

TARGET
NUMBER

ROLL

Notably Inept.

-2

A trivial task.

5

Typical human capability.

0

Straightforward task.

7

Good

Better than usual; most professionals or
talented newcomers.

+2

Complex task, requiring attention to detail.

9

Expert

Noted/famed professional; talent with
skill to back it up.

+4

Intricate task, difficult and requiring sharp
concentration, hard for a typical untrained person
(Average).

11

Master

Acclaimed genius: talent with
substantial skill behind it.

+6

Extremely difficult task, hard for most professionals in
the field (Good).

13

Poor
Average

QUALITIES

ABOUT THE PDQ SYSTEM

Qualities help further describe your character’s
particular talents, skills, and flaw(s). They also
provide game mechanics for how those abilities or
disabilities work in play (see below, Task Resolution).
Qualities should grow out of the character concept
and game setting.

The Prose Descriptive Qualities (PDQ) System has
been designed for evocative simplicity, speed, and
flexibility in play. Three levels of resolution, suitable
for any type of situation.

CREATING CHARACTERS

Qualities represent a broad skill or field of
knowledge; if a particular Quality is relevant at all to
an action or topic, the character may apply that
Quality when attempting that action or
understanding that topic. This is called the penumbra
(or “shadow”) of the Quality. Therefore, a player
shouldn’t choose Qualities that are too narrow or its
penumbra will cast too narrow a shadow; too broad,
and identifying the sorts of things that should fall
under the penumbra becomes pointless. The
parameters for what’s “too broad” or “too narrow”
are up to the individual GM.

A PDQ character is made up of several elements; in
different games, different elements can -- and should
-- be used. For example, Dead Inside (DI) uses 8
elements (Personality, Backstory, Soul Loss,
Discovery, Qualities, Type, Soul Point Pool, and
Miscellany). On the other hand, Monkey, Ninja,
Pirate, Robot: the Roleplaying Game (MNPR:RPG)
only uses 6 elements (Type, Goal, Name, Qualities,
Mojo Points, and Challenge Rating).
The core element of PDQ is the concept of a prose,
descriptive, do-it-yourself, wide-ranging Quality
standing in as attribute, advantage, merit, flaw, skill,
or incapability. Other subsystems within a game -like DI's Virtue & Vice System and MNPR:RPG's
Mojo Powers -- can affect this core, or operate
independently, but in either case, should be
represented in character generation somehow.

For example, consider a character who has the
Quality of “Teacher.” For some PDQ games, that
will be perfectly fine; for others, too broad. The GM
might ask the player to refine the Quality, to give a
better idea of the sorts of things that will fall under
the Teacher Quality’s penumbra. So: “Teacher”

1

PDQ CORE RULES

©2004 Chad Underkoffler

neither noteworthy nor inept – that is, they’re
Average [0].

could become “College History Prof,” “High School
Chemistry Teacher,” or “Grade School Teacher.”
While all would cover the basic concept of
education, each individual choice will bring
different skills under the Quality penumbra – not
just their fields of interest, but also supplementary
knowledge: the College History Prof would have
more experience with (academic) politics, the High
School Chemistry Teacher would know more about
adolescent fads, and the Grade School Teacher
would be better at dealing with kids on a sugar high.

QUALITY EXAMPLES
Physical: Gunplay, Kung Fu, Roguishly Handsome,
Weightlifting, Ballroom Dance, Perseverance.
Mental: Oriental Philosophy, Fine Food and Drink, Sports
Trivia, Speed-reading, Strategy & Tactics, Computer
Programming.
Social: Wu-Shen
Conversationalist,
Effusive.

Take another example: “Gunplay.” This Quality
would be useful not just in shooting at things, but
also in cleaning and repairing guns, discovering the
location of nearby gun dealers and shooting ranges,
knowing the history of firearms, and so forth. If the
player had instead selected a Quality of “.44
Magnum,” the Quality would only be useful in
shooting that individual model of gun, and involve
knowledge surrounding .44 Magnums exclusively.

Professional: Teacher, Martial Artist, Spy, Professional
Athlete, Freelance Writer, Bounty Hunter, Mad Scientist.

A Strength is an inherent positive aspect (benefit,
skill, talent, attribute, or power) of a character. Come
up with a word or a pithy phrase to sum up the
Strength. Examples include Fighting, Credit Rating,
Fly Like A Bird, Find Bargains, and Run Away!

Qualities are often drawn from five general areas:

A Weakness is an inherent negative aspect of the
character, stemming from ignorance, flawed
understanding, physical or mental incapability, or
some other vulnerability. A word of advice: pick
something that will be fun or entertaining (for you
the player, not necessarily you the character) to flub
at! Come up with a word or a pithy phrase to sum
up the Weakness. Examples here include Glass Jaw,
Bad Credit Rating, Slow As Molasses, and
Wallflower. Weaknesses are always Poor [-2] Rank.

♦ Physical. Having to do with the body,
athleticism, or natural talents;
♦ Mental. Areas of study, intellectual acuity,
education;
♦ Social. Groups the character is a member of
or associates with, skills in dealing with
people;
♦ Professional. Knowledge and skills picked
up on the job; and
♦ Other. Esoteric skills, psychic
physical resources, or superpowers.

Monks, MI6, Football Team,
Intimidating
Guy,
Charmingly

Depending upon the conception of what a character
is like, any Quality (other than that gained from
Type) can be a Strength or a Weakness. For example,
suppose a character has “Hook-Handed” as a
Quality. If it’s ranked Average [0] or above, it’s a
Strength: the character can use his Hook as a
weapon (in physical conflicts) or as a threat (in social
conflicts) – or even wackier things picking a lock or
sliding down a rope – with an increased chance of
success. But if the character has “Poor [-2] HookHanded,” this is a Weakness: the character keeps
getting his Hook stuck into things, forgets about it
when he tries to scratch his head, has problems
holding onto things that require two hands, and so
forth. It’s all in the way you spin it.

talents,

Qualities have Ranks, which indicate increasing
proficiency. From lowest to highest, the Ranks are:
♦ Poor [-2];
♦ Average [0];
♦ Good [+2];
♦ Expert [+4]; and
♦ Master [+6].
The numbers in square brackets following the Rank
of the Quality show the Rank’s Modifier – how
much is added to or subtracted from a 2d6 dice roll
(see below).

IMPORTANT NOTE - If a PC wants to be particularly
better at some Quality that might normally fall under
the penumbra of another Quality (for example, taking
“Soldier” and “Rifle” separately), it’s perfectly okay to
do so, provided that the player realizes that in exchange

Characters have some things going for them
(Strengths), and at least one thing working against
them (Weakness). At everything else, characters are

2

PDQ CORE RULES

©2004 Chad Underkoffler

for a benefit up-front, their character generation choice
will
affect
future
Improvement
(see
below,
Improvement).

Examples: Jefferson wants to climb a wall using
his Good [+2] Outdoorsman Quality (he
successfully convinces the GM that climbing a
cliff face is similar enough to climbing a wall for
it to count), he’ll automatically succeed in scaling
Poor [5] and Average [7] Difficulty walls.

Players should have several options when designing
the Qualities of their character. They may choose
between having more Qualities at a lower level of
competency, or having fewer Qualities at a higher
level of competency.

If Kristov wanted to climb a wall, he has no
applicable Quality, and so would have the
default Quality Rank of Average [0]. This means
he can only automatically succeed in climbing
Poor [5] Difficulty walls.

It's a good idea to first determine how many ranks
of Strengths and Weaknesses you wish characters to
have, and then to lay the possibilities out simply for
the players. For example, DI characters have 8 Ranks
of Strengths and 1 Rank of Weakness, which breaks
down this way:

For Jefferson, Good [9] or higher Difficulty Rank
walls are complicated; for Kristov, Average [7] or
higher Difficulty Rank walls are complicated.

A. 4 Good [+2] Strengths and 1 Poor [-2]
Weakness.

Upshifts (Being Badass)
This is how PCs get more bang for their buck. If the
player describes his character’s attempt to perform
an action in a graphic, flavorful, and entertaining
way, the GM can give them an Upshift. An Upshift
means that for that particular action, the PC rolls as
if their Quality were one level higher (essentially
giving him an additional +2 to their roll). So, rather
than “I hit the sailor” (or “I haggle”), the player says
something like “I grab the sailor’s shirt with one
hand and pull him closer to punch him in the face
with my other fist – arr, matey!” (or says, in
character, “May the fleas from a thousand camels
infest the beds of your children if you try and rob
me in this way!”). If the PC had a Good [+2] Pirate
(or Bargaining) Quality, this would change his roll
in attempting to hit the sailor (or haggle with the
merchant) from 2d6+2 to 2d6+4, as if he were Expert
[+4] Rank.

B. 1 Expert [+4] Strength, 2 Good [+2] Strengths,
and 1 Poor [-2] Weakness.
C. 2 Expert [+4] Strengths and 1 Poor [-2]
Weakness.
D. 1 Master [+6] Strength, 1 Good [+2] Strength,
and 1 Poor [-2] Weakness.
Never fear: if after play begins, a particular Quality
sees no use and doesn’t really add to the
characterization of a PC, a player should feel free to
change it to something that fits better – but only
after talking to the GM first.

TASK RESOLUTION
When your character tries to do something, the GM
will determine if the situation is simple, complicated,
or conflict. Let’s take each in turn.

NOTE - Upshifts above Master Rank add an extra die to the
character’s roll (i.e., instead of rolling 2d6+6+2, the
character rolls 3d6+6).

SIMPLE SITUATIONS
In simple situations, the task is clear-cut, there are no
outstanding issues interfering with the attempted
action, or randomness would bog down the game. In
a simple situation, the GM looks at the Master Chart
(see below), and determines the Difficulty Rank of
the task. Then, the GM compares that Difficulty
Rank to the character’s most appropriate Quality
Rank. The higher Rank of the two “wins.” If the
Difficulty Rank of the task is equal to or higher than
the character’s relevant Quality Rank, the task
becomes a complicated situation (see below).

COMPLICATED SITUATIONS
Dice rolls are made in complicated situations: where
comparisons of Rank are inconclusive, or when
randomness is desired. Complicated situations are
when Quality and Difficulty Ranks are tied, or when
Quality Rank is lower than Difficulty Rank. To
attempt a complicated situation, the PC rolls two
regular six-sided dice (2d6), and adds the Modifier
for their Quality Rank. To succeed, the PC must

3

PDQ CORE RULES

©2004 Chad Underkoffler

NOTE - In addition to the in-line examples in
each section, two detailed examples of conflict
situations – with all the bells and whistles –
appear at the end of this chapter.

match or roll higher than the Target Number of the
task’s Difficulty Rank.
NOTE - Some failures – like attempting to walk a skinny
building ledge – may carry the chance of getting hurt. For
more on that topic, see below, Environmental Damage.

INITIATIVE

Examples: Jefferson is trying to climb a Good [9]
Difficulty wall using his Good [+2] Outdoorsman
Quality. The Target Number of Good [9]
Difficulty – as noted in the brackets – is 9.
Jefferson must roll 2d6 and add his Modifier of
+2, trying to match or beat a 9. He rolls a 3 and a
5, giving him 3+5+2 = 10! He succeeds in
climbing the wall.

First, figure out who goes first – that is, who has
Initiative. Most of the time, the flow of the situation
will indicate who acts first, but in some cases, this
order may need to be determined. Here’s how to do
it:
1.

Kristov wants to follow Jefferson up that Good
[9] Difficulty wall: again, he has no applicable
Quality, and so must use the default Quality
Rank of Average [0]. He must match or beat a 9
when rolling 2d6. He rolls exactly the same thing
that Jefferson did: a 3 and a 5, and since Average
Rank Qualities have no Modifier, that’s a total of
8. This is below the Target Number of the wall, so
Kristov fails.

If a character attacks without warning –
taking the victim by surprise – the attacker
automatically goes first. (At the GM’s
discretion, he might even get a free turn, if
the target is caught totally unawares.)

Downshifts
While functionally the same thing (a -2 to a 2d6 plus
Modifiers roll), the reasons behind having a Weakness or
incurring Downshifts are different.

When a character’s Qualities are set against the
Qualities of other characters, this isn’t just
complicated, it’s a conflict situation (see below).

For example, Jefferson has a Weakness of Poor [-2] Reader.
If he needs to do a really complicated and unusual repair
on Declaration (his hog), requiring reading the bike’s
manual, this Weakness will affect his overall competence
(Expert [+4] Biker Dude) in the repair. Instead of rolling
2d6+4, Jefferson will be rolling 2d6+2. That’s just par for
the course, an effect of his Strength and Weakness
interacting in that particular situation.

CONFLICT SITUATIONS
Conflict situations involve active resistance by
another to a character’s attempts to perform a task:
trying to punch a guy in the face, out-thinking a
chess player, running a race, or convincing a cop
that, you weren’t really speeding. Conflict situations
in PDQ include more than just the immediate
success or failure of an attempted action; here,
conflict includes the back and forth of an active
contest, out-maneuvering the competition, and
wearing down an opponent’s resistance. Examples
of conflict situations include combat, seduction,
haggling, debating, and so forth. (Note that some
groups won’t necessarily want to use the conflict
situation mechanics to resolve social interactions,
and will want to rely on pure roleplaying instead;
this is fine – the rules structure is there if a group
wishes to use it.)

A Downshift means that for the action in question, the PC
rolls as if his Quality were one level lower (essentially
giving him a -2 to their roll). Downshifts can come from a
number of sources: if a combatant decides to Play It Cagey
(see below, Conflict Jazz), the effects of Failure or Damage
Ranks (see below, Taking It On the Chin), or -- in Dead
Inside -- the general penalty to social situations that the
Dead Inside have in the Real World.
While judicious use of Downshifts to reflect a sudden or
unexpected change in the complexity of a situation can
work very well, GMs should resist the temptation to
overuse Downshifts as situational modifiers. PDQ games
tend to run smoother if the GM simply sets the Difficulty
Rank (and thus, Target Number) of a task appropriately.
For example, if the PCs are attempting to climb a Average
[7] Difficulty wall and it begins to rain, a Downshift to
each of their relevant Qualities makes sense. However, if
it’s already raining when they begin their attempt, simply
make the wall Good [9] difficulty from the get-go.

In conflict situations, the characters involved
compare the results of 2d6 plus Modifier rolls; the
highest successful result wins. However, there are a
few refinements of conflict requiring closer
attention. These are Initiative, Moment of Truth, and
Damage.

NOTE - Downshifts below Poor Rank mean automatic
failure in the use of that Quality.

4

PDQ CORE RULES
2.

3.

©2004 Chad Underkoffler

Example: Jimbo and Salty Dave are sparring,
getting ready for a big combat Challenge next
week with the Roboto Brothers. Jimbo is using
his Expert [+4] Rasslin’ Quality here, while Salty
Dave is using his Good [+2] Cutlass Quality.
Jimbo’s Rank is higher, so he goes first.

The character with the highest Rank in a
“speed” or “reaction time” Quality relevant
to the situation (Fastest Gun in the East,
Jumpy, Quick Wits) goes first, followed in
order by those with relevant Qualities of
lower Ranks.

Zandra is using her Expert [+4] Marketing
Executive Quality here (she’s used to picking up
business lunches) and Jefferson’s using his Expert
[+4] Biker Dude Quality (he’s used to
intimidating people into doing what he wants
them to).

The character with the highest Rank in a
Quality not relevant to the situation goes
next, followed by those of lower Ranks.

Zandra and Jefferson are both at Expert Rank,
and thus tied. The GM decides that Initiative
between them will be determined with a die roll.
Zandra rolls a 3 and Jefferson rolls a 4. Jefferson
has Initiative.

Being Lameass
Being Lameass is – in some ways – the opposite of Being
Badass. Boring, uncharacteristic, or disruptive roleplaying
can ruin everybody else’s fun, and after all, the point of
roleplaying is to have a good time. If a player is reading,
refusing to pay attention, watching TV, pedantically ruleslawyering, utterly ignoring the characterization of their
PC, being pointlessly abusive or distracting to other
players, or – saints preserve us! – sleeping at the gaming
table, they are working against the overall good time. In
these cases, the GM could give the offending PC a
Downshift based on the player’s behavior. . . but what’s the
point? If the player’s not interested enough in the game to
even pay attention, penalizing this character will probably
have little effect on his behavior.

MOMENT OF TRUTH
The character whose turn it is will be called the
attacker; the character who is the target of the
attacker’s action is called the defender. The attacker
explains what his attempted action is, and the
defender explains how he’d try to counter that
action. Then, the attacker rolls 2d6 for his relevant
Quality and adds the appropriate Modifier for
Quality Rank. The defender does the same. The
character with the higher total wins.

Try to discover the cause of the player’s Being Lameass.
Maybe it’s something about the focus or subject matter of
the campaign, a difference of roleplaying style, or even an
unrelated personal issue that’s bugging the player. The
answer to Being Lameass is to discuss the situation
outside of the game – either by taking a break or talking
between sessions – and try to work through it like grownups. A little bit of open communication can do wonders
for these sorts of issues.

If the attacker is successful, damage (see below) is
applied to the defender; if the attacker fails, no
damage is done. A tie is just that – nobody wins,
nobody loses. . . but they both muss each other up a
little.
Example: As the Turn starts, Jimbo is the attacker
and Salty Dave is the defender. Jimbo is going to
grapple the Pirate using his Expert [+4] Rasslin’
and Average [0] Monkey Qualities, and Salty
Dave decides to try and hold him off using his
Good [+2] Cutlass and Average [0] Pirate
Qualities. Jimbo rolls 2d6+4+0 for a result of 10,
Salty Dave rolls 2d6+2+0 for a result of 8. Thus,
Jimbo does damage to Salty Dave this turn – see
below – and has grabbed the scurvy dog. (If Salty
Dave had been a better Pirate, this would give a
different result: if he were a Good [+2] Pirate, the
characters would have tied and done each other
damage; if he were an Expert [+4] Pirate, Jimbo’s
attack would fail and he’d take no damage.)

Ties can be broken by either:
♦ Stating that tied characters resolve their
actions simultaneously; or
♦ Rolling a die, with the highest number
winning Initiative.
Once Initiative is determined, conflict resolution can
proceed. Characters with a higher Initiative may
“hold their actions” for as long as they want, but
after the last character has done something, they
need to take that held action or lose it. After
everyone involved in the conflict situation has taken
an action (or chosen not to), the characters can act
again, in the same order. Lather, rinse, repeat.

On his action, Salty Dave wants to escape from
Jimbo’s monkey-hug. He gets a result of 11, while
the Monkey gets a result of 6. Salty Dave does a
lot of damage to Jimbo in getting free.

5

PDQ CORE RULES

©2004 Chad Underkoffler

either a Failure Rank or a Damage Rank, depending
upon the nature of the conflict.

TIME IN CONFLICT

In mental, social, and some physical conflicts, loss of
capability is usually temporary, and is represented
by Failure Ranks. Examples include a chess match,
witty repartee, or running a race.

The terms used in PDQ for identifying the passage of
time:
Scenes are the entire conflict; starting with determining
Initiative and ending with someone winning, losing,
surrendering, or leaving the situation.
Each character takes a turn or action: that’s when they
make their move, say their piece, throw a punch, etc. (If
Turn is capitalized, it generally means the set of all
character’s next actions and reactions.)
Other characters react during a character’s turn – saying
something back or performing a defense, usually – but
their reactions can only be in response to the actions of
the character whose turn it currently is. They cannot
initiate actions until their turn.

In many physical conflicts (and even some physical
complicated situations), loss of capability is more
enduring, and is represented by Damage Ranks.
Examples here include combat, running through
fire, or falling off of a wall.

Dishing It Out
In a successful attack, the difference between the
attacking and defending rolls determines how many
Failure or Damage Ranks are done to the defender.
If the attacker has any Upshifts or Downshifts on
their successful attack, that shift will carry through
to damage resolution.

RANGE IN CONFLICT
In general, GMs can be really flexible with distance in a
PDQ game. Ranges are either Near (can punch it),
Middling (can run up and punch it), Far (can throw or
shoot at it), or Too Far (out of range). If one really wants
to connect numbers to this, Near would be any distance
up to a yard, Middling would be between 1 and 3 yards,
Far would be between 3 and 60 yards, and Too Far is
anything over 60 yards.

If the roll results are tied, both characters take a
single Downshift.
NOTE - Qualities Upshifted above Master Rank
provide an additional Rank of Damage to be
applied.
Example: Following on the first example under
Moment of Truth, on Jimbo’s action, the difference
between his roll and Salty Dave’s was 2, so he
does 2 Damage Ranks to the Pirate.

MOVEMENT IN CONFLICT
While PDQ tends to leave movement rates for characters
abstract and up to the discretion of the GM (like by
requiring a character to make a roll using a speed or
movement Quality vs. a reasonable Difficulty Rank),
some folks like a concrete movement rate. So here it is:
characters have a movement rate equal to 2 yards plus
twice the sum of all involved Qualities per turn. Half of
this (i.e., the sum of their Qualities being used) is taken
on their action of their Turn, and the other half is taken
during their reactions. This means that a Good [+2]
Robot with Qualities of Expert [+4] Hover-Jets and
Good [+2] Fast would have a movement rate of 10 yards
per Turn (base 2, +2+4+2); they can move up to 5 yards
on their action and 5 yards on their reactions.

On Salty Dave’s action, he did a whopping 5
Damage Ranks to Jimbo.

Environmental damage – like that taken from falling,
jumping through a fire, drowning, or other
complicated situations – works by comparing the
Target Number of the task against the total of the
character’s failed roll. The difference between roll
and Target Number is the Damage Ranks taken.
Example: Say that in the example above from
Complicated Situations, where Kristov wants to
follow Jefferson up a Good [9] Difficulty wall,
our rockstar is instead trying to follow the biker
down the wall. As he has no applicable Quality,
he must use the default Rank of Average [0], and
match or beat a 9 when rolling 2d6. He rolls a 3
and a 5, for a total of 8. This is below the Target
Number of the wall, so Kristov fails, falls, and
takes 1 Damage Rank from the sudden stop.

DAMAGE
Damage (be it physical, mental, emotional, or social)
is the loss of capability. As a character takes damage,
he is less likely to be able to perform at peak
efficiency. This is shown by a temporary Downshift
applied to the character’s listed Qualities called

6

PDQ CORE RULES

©2004 Chad Underkoffler

Taking It On the Chin

On the positive side, the player of the defending PC
decides where to apply the Damage Ranks (see the
textbox, The Key to Understanding Conflict
Abstraction). They may only be applied to those
Qualities listed on the character’s sheet (that is, not
any one of the character’s infinite number of
“default” Average Qualities). When any one of a
character’s Qualities drops below Poor Rank, the
character is out of the Scene – that could mean
they’ve totally flubbed their seduction attempt, been
knocked unconscious (or killed) in combat, or run
out of test-taking time and must put down their #2
pencil. The GM describes how and why the PC is
out of the Scene, and lets the player know if/when
they can return (see below, Recovering from Damage).

Firstly, if – in the GM’s opinion – a character has
relevant Qualities of Good [+2] Rank or better that
could feasibly allow him to ignore or resist damage
in the situation (like Armor-Plating, Iron Will, True
Love, or Impeccable Pedigree), the character can not
only add it to his reaction rolls (to dodge, parry,
block, evade, etc.), but he can choose to sacrifice a
Rank of this protection in order to ignore Failure or
Damage Ranks.
In each Scene (not per turn or reaction; see boxed
text, Time in Conflict), a character can choose to
Downshift the Quality; by doing so, the character
can ignore all Failure or Damage Ranks from one
action. The player chooses if and when to use these
freebies. That means that if somebody is trying to
pry a donation out of a PC who has Expert [+4]
Rank Iron Will, the PC can in theory ignore 2 turns
of Failure Ranks over the course of the conflict by
reducing his Iron Will once for each attack against
him that is successful. However, once a Quality
reaches Average [0] Rank (through Downshifting to
ignore or resist or from taking Failure or Damage
Ranks), it can no longer be used in this fashion.

Example: From the first Dishing It Out example,
Jimbo did 2 Damage Ranks to Salty Dave. The
Pirate chooses to reduce his Good [+2]
Accountant and Good [+2] Climbing Rigging
Qualities, placing them both temporarily at
Average [0] Rank.
Salty Dave slammed Jimbo for 5 Damage Ranks.
The Monkey chooses to drop his Good [+2] Chef
to Poor [-2] Chef (2 Damage Ranks) and his Good
[+2] Brachiator to Poor [-2] Brachiator (2 more
Damage Ranks). Unfortunately, this leaves one
more Damage Rank to be accounted for, so Jimbo
is forced to drop his Expert [+4] Rasslin’ to Good
[+2] Rasslin’.

Secondly, any character that has a Weakness related
to the type of conflict (for example, Glass Jaw in a
combat, Math is Hard! in an arithmetic test, or Can’t
Say No to a Pretty Face in a seduction attempt), will
have to take two extra Damage Ranks the first time –
and only the first time – they get tagged in a relevant
situation. (That’s why it’s a Weakness; if they have
an off-setting Strength that allows them to ignore or
resist as above, they can use that to ameliorate the
badness.)

Both characters have now taken a turn, and can
choose to continue the conflict or not. Jimbo
decides to call a time-out.
If Salty Dave had somehow used a banana in his
action, Jimbo’s Weakness of Poor [-2] Banana
Addict would have made things much, much
worse for our Monkey. If so, Salty Dave would
have done 7 Damage Ranks to Jimbo, instead of
just 5, bringing the Monkey closer to losing the
conflict.

NOTE - Qualities reduced to Poor [-2] Rank
during a conflict situation by Failure or Damage
Ranks are not Weaknesses; Weaknesses are
character flaws decided upon at character
generation. There’s a difference between a
Weakness of Poor [-2] Athlete (the character’s
never been that into sports) versus someone in a
race who’s Good [+2] Athlete has been
temporarily reduced to Poor [-2] Rank by
accumulating Failure Ranks (he’s out of breath
and feeling the burn).

Out for Blood?
For physical conflicts, the default assumption in
PDQ is that characters can only be killed once they
are unconscious or otherwise helpless. This requires
no roll, check, or action, simply a statement on the
attacker’s next turn that the he wishes to kill the
victim. (GMs should feel free to change this rule if
they desire. Perhaps characters pick whether they
are doing “bruising” damage or “killing” damage at
the beginning of a conflict situation.)

Lastly, if a defender is caught totally and utterly by
surprise by an attacker – to the extent of getting a
free turn (see Initiative) – or makes not the slightest
effort to defend himself, that could add an
additional Rank to what he Takes On the Chin.

7

PDQ CORE RULES

©2004 Chad Underkoffler

conflict Scene. The player selects which
Qualities’ Ranks are restored. However, the
character will not recover any more Ranks
until the GM tells them to roll again.

Recovering from Damage
Once a Scene ends, the injured character will begin
to recover lost Ranks. How many he gets back
depends upon whether he was in momentary danger
or is still in continuing danger.

NOTE - A Strength like “Quick Healer” should allow
the character to gain back the standard 1d6 roll, plus
their Modifier. A Weakness like “Slow Healer” would
mean that the character rolls 1d6-2 (the Modifier for
Poor), with a minimum of zero Ranks regained.

The Key to Understanding Conflict
Abstraction

Example: Jefferson’s been beaten up and stuffed in a
garbage can by a Zombi. At the end of the conflict, all
of his Qualities were Downshifted to Poor, except for
Biker Dude, which he had zeroed. Since this
happened in a bad part of Zombitown, he’s still in
continuing danger. He rolls for damage recovery and
gets a 3. He puts 1 Rank into bringing Biker Dude to
Poor [-2] (now he’s conscious), and uses the
remaining 2 to get Toughness back to Good [+2], since
he figures it’ll be the most useful if someone else
jumps him.

Basically, in any conflict, some of a character’s Qualities
can be thought of as useful for either “attack,” “defense,”
or “absorption.”
As an example, say a character has Good [+2] Rank in the
Qualities of Kung Fu, Debating, and Accountant. In
combat (a physical conflict), the character will probably
opt to keep Kung Fu at Good [+2], and apply Damage
Ranks to Debating and Accountant. In an argument (a
social conflict), the character will want to keep Debating
high for as long as possible, and take Failure Ranks on
Kung Fu and Accountant first. If being audited by the IRS
(could be a mental, a social, or even a professional conflict,
depending on how the GM spins the situation), the
character would protect Accountant, try to keep Debating
at Good [+2] as long as he could, and sacrifice Kung Fu.

OPTIONAL RULE: INCREASING DAMAGE
PDQ assumes that one is using an appropriate tool
alongside a Quality – a spreadsheet program with
Accounting, a pistol with Gunplay, a little black dress
with Seduction, etc. If the GM so chooses, this assumption
can be changed such that specialized equipment provides
1 Upshift, limited to Damage Rank determination only.

This abstraction of how Failure or Damage Ranks are
applied isn’t meant to be a one-to-one relation (“Hey, why
does getting punched in the face lower my Florist
Quality?”), but amusing justifications can be made up
anyway (“Well, your black eye makes it hard to arrange
peonies...”).

Under this optional rule, if a character with Good [+2]
Kung-Fu uses nunchucks when breaking heads, while
he’d be rolling for success at Good [+2] Rank, but when
comparing roll results for damage purposes, he’d treat his
Kung-Fu as if it were Expert [+4] Rank. (This boils down
to an extra 2 Failure or Damage Ranks.)

♦ Momentary Danger. If nothing else is going
on, and the character is otherwise safe,
relaxed, and lacking any time constraints.
Examples of momentary danger include
playing Go Fish with a six year old, a car
chase (though some Environmental Damage
could happen. . .), or a seduction attempt. At
the end of the Scene, all Failure or Damage
Ranks are removed, restoring Qualities to
their appropriate levels.

CONFLICT JAZZ
Here are some methods to get even more of your
tactical or strategic ya-yas out. Any character can
choose to use them in the course of their conflicts.

CONFLICT STRATEGIES
There are two additional strategies that a character
can use in conflicts, depending upon if he wants to
specifically concentrate on attack or defense. One
can only be used by an attacker and the other only
by a defender. If a PC wishes to utilize either of
these strategies, they must announce it at the
beginning of their turn. They cannot be used on the
same turn.

♦ Continuing Danger. Danger is continuing if
the overarching situation that the conflict
happened in is risky, stressful, or under
deadline. An example of continuing danger
would be playing poker in a seedy dive bar
with three Mafiosi. Characters will recover
1d6 lost Ranks of Quality at the end of the

8

PDQ CORE RULES

©2004 Chad Underkoffler

♦ Flip Out. The attacker flips out all over the
target, making strong attacks (physical,
mental, or social) without much heed to
defense. A Flip-Out grants an Upshift for the
attack (and any subsequent damage) and a
Downshift on all defensive reactions and
other non-conflict-related actions until his
next turn.

USING MULTIPLE QUALITIES IN SIMPLE,
COMPLICATED, OR CONFLICT SITUATIONS
If the GM agrees that more than one Quality can be
brought to bear on a task, simply combine the
Modifiers for the relevant Qualities. (If a character
spent one of their choices in character generation on
buying something under their penumbra as a
separate Quality, this is where they reap the benefit.)
Furthermore, this case includes not just the Qualities
of a single character, but also if multiple characters
team-up to perform a task. If multiple characters are
joining forces, only one of them needs to roll, and
that’s the character with the higher Initiative.

♦ Play It Cagey. The defender plays it cagey,
opting for safety by not taking any chances,
holding back in the conflict. Playing It Cagey
grants an Upshift for all defensives reaction
and a Downshift on all the character’s nonconflict-related actions until their next turn;
unfortunately, Playing It Cagey means that
the character’s next attack action will suffer
from this Downshift.

Example 1: Standing on the second floor of the
food court, Salty Dave sees some Ninjas attacking
his buddy Jimbo on the ground floor. He decides
to join the fray, and grabs a decorative garland to
swing down all Errol Flynn-like while slicing
with his cutlass. Salty Dave can combine his
Good [+2] Cutlass and Good [+2] Swinging
Qualities (as well as his Average [0] Pirate
Quality) in his attack on one of the Ninjas. He’ll
be rolling 2d6+2+2+0, or 2d6+4, for this
swashbuckling maneuver.

OPTIONAL RULE: ABSTRACTING CONFLICT
FURTHER
You could streamline conflict situations further by
treating them as complicated situations. That is, instead
of having character roll using their Qualities against each
other to determine success, simply treat their Quality
Rank as a Difficulty Rank. Then, the attacker uses the
Target Number of that Difficulty Rank to roll against for
success; as with Environmental Damage, the difference
between roll result and Target Number gives the Damage
Rank. No fuss, no muss (especially for faceless
henchmen, if your PDQ game is in the cinematic idiom).

Example 2: Zandra (Expert [+4] Marketing Exec)
and Kristov (Good [+2] Rockstar) decide to work
together in a pitch meeting to try and convince
an Expert [+4] Record Company Exec that
Kristov is worth re-signing. Zandra will roll
2d6+4+2; the GM rolls for the Record Company
Exec. She rolls a 4 and a 6, for a total of 16, and
the GM rolls a 4 and a 6 for a total of 14. Zandra
and Kristov successfully convince the NPC that
Kristov’s career is making a comeback!

Example: Salty Dave has gotten to the treasure chamber of a Ninja
Hut. His path is blocked by a Henchman Ninja (Average [0]
Henchman). Salty Dave rolls his Good [+2] Cutlass Quality against
the henchman’s Target Number of 7. He rolls a 3 and a 6, plus 2
from Good [+2] Cutlass, giving him a total of 11: Eleven easily
beats 7, so Salty Dave slices the henchman from stem to stern in
one blow and continues walking toward his prize – the Ninjas’
sweet, sweet uranium.

USING A QUALITY AGAINST MULTIPLE TARGETS
If it’s necessary for a character to take on multiple
targets simultaneously in a single action, he can split
his attentions (and relevant Quality Ranks) between
them. Of course, this leads to a commensurate
decrease in effective skill. For each additional target
selected, apply a Downshift to the Quality Rank.

Shift Accumulation
In PDQ, all Upshifts, Downshifts, and bonus dice are
cumulative. That means that if a character is Being Badass
and Flipping Out simultaneously, he would have 2
Upshifts (or a Modifier of +4) on the attack and damage.
This means if the starting Quality was of Average [0] Rank
(2d6), it would temporarily become Expert Rank (2d6+4);
if the Quality was Good [+2], the roll would be 2d6+6, and
if the Quality was Expert [+4], the roll would be 3d6+6,
because one of the Upshifts would take the Rank above
Master and translate into an extra die to roll.

Example: Say that Jimbo (Expert [+4] Rasslin’) is
fighting two Ninja Bikers. If he tries to take them
both on, he’ll only be at an effective Rank of
Good [+2] for his attacks on each. If there were 3
Ninja Bikers, he’d have an effective Rank of
Average [0]; if 4, Poor [-2]. If there were 5 Ninja
Bikers, he’d automatically fail all five attacks,
since his split Rank would bottom out with

9

PDQ CORE RULES

©2004 Chad Underkoffler

another Downshift. Better to take them on one or
two at a time.

KRISTOV WOLFF, HAS-BEEN ROCK-AND-ROLLER

But wait! Jimbo has Chef at Good [+2] Rank.
Perhaps if the melee took place in a restaurant
kitchen, the GM might agree that Jimbo could
add in his culinary know-how (grabbing
cleavers, throwing pots and pans, creative use of
the Fryolator, etc.). This circumstance would
allow Jimbo to take on 2 Ninja at Expert [+4], 3
Ninja at Good [+2], 4 Ninja at Average [0], 5
Ninja at Poor [-2], and auto-fail only when facing
6 Ninja in the kitchen at once.

Personality: Sensual. Kristov understands the world through his senses,
especially hearing, touch, and taste (all of his hit songs drew strongly on at
least one of those elements).
Backstory: Virtue: Generous. Vice: Avarice. At age sixteen, Kristov Wolff
was on top of the world with two platinum albums, a legion of screaming
fans, sold-out concerts, and more money than a small bank. After a tenyear whirl of drugs, drinking, promiscuity, and CPT (Caviar, Paté, &
Truffle) sandwiches, the albums aren’t selling like they used to, and now
the fans, the concerts, and the money are gone.
Soul Loss: Kristov let his soul rot first by the cruddy things he did to get
to the top, and then chipped away big chunks of it as he indulged in
celebrity-scope excesses. As things started falling apart, instead of taking
control, he numbed himself with drugs, food, and mindless television. One
day, his soul was just gone.

IMPROVEMENT
If the game provides them, characters can use their
Experience Points for Improvement, reflecting the
gaining of skill and experience. To Improve a
Quality, a character must spend 4 Experience Points
per Rank improved. When a character reaches
Master Rank in a Quality, it cannot be improved
further.

Discovery: Between drunken binges, Kristov ran out of vodka. On the
way to the corner liquor store, he passed a fortune teller’s shop. Thinking
it’d be a hoot, he decided to drop in and see if the palmist recognized him:
maybe she’d be a cute Gothy-type owned his albums before Sisters of
Mercy took its place on her turntable. He got more than he bargained for.
The old woman with the scarves on her head threw him out before he even
sat down, calling him names like “demon,” “dybbuk,” and “monster.” He
was so shocked, he almost forgot to get his Stoli. Almost.
In the checkout line, a young guy with tats covering his bald head touched
him on the shoulder. “I know what’s wrong with you, buddy. You’re Dead
Inside. I can help.”

Thus, to turn a Weakness into a powerful Strength:
♦ Raising Poor [-2] Rank Sailor to Average [0]
Rank Sailor costs 4 Experience Points.
♦ Raising Poor [-2] Rank Sailor to Good [+2]
Rank Sailor costs 8 Experience Points (4 for
Poor to Average and 4 for Average to Good).
♦ Raising Poor [-2] Rank Sailor to Expert [+4]
Rank Sailor costs 12 Experience Points (4 for
Poor to Average, 4 for Average to Good, and
4 for Good to Expert).
♦ Raising Poor [-2] Rank Sailor to Master [+6]
Rank Sailor costs 16 Experience Points (4 for
Poor to Average, 4 for Average to Good, and
4 for Good to Expert, and 4 for Expert to
Master).

Qualities: Good [+2] Rockstar, Good [+2] Songwriter, Good [+2] Dirty
Fighter, Good [+2] Second Sight, Poor [-2] at Accounting.
Type: Average [0] Dead Inside.
Soul Point Pool: 1
Notes: Kristov’s a short guy with long ratty blonde hair. He’s got a skinny
frame, but is growing a little potbelly. His band was called “the Wolff Pak,”
and was made up of 4 guys: Kristov, “Chubby” Bill Boro, Jimmy Carlosi,
and Sammy “SoCo” Rogers. SoCo’s gone on to a successful solo career.
The group’s biggest #1 was “Be My Love Bunny, Honey.”

JEFFERSON, BIKER BRUISER
Personality: Grizzly Adams. Live and let live, or else.
Backstory: Virtue: Integrity. Vice: Cruelty. Jefferson’s a big bear of a Hell’s
Angel: while most of the time he’s like Gentle Ben, he’ll flip out Kodiakstyle on someone who pushes him too hard. Luckily, he can take a lot of
guff before snapping.

NOTE - If a character wishes to gain a totally new
Quality, they need to spend 4 Experience Points to
gain it at Good [+2] Rank.

Soul Loss: Jefferson sold his soul to get out of a tight spot that he doesn’t
discuss: he almost killed his own brother in a bar fight, and traded his soul
to a man who had no eyes to heal Stevie. The next day, Stevie killed a
convenience store clerk and severely wounded a little kid during a hold-up.
Then, the punk laughed about it to his brother. Now, Jefferson wants to
change the deal he struck with the Eyeless Guy... undo Stevie’s healing and
give it to the kid in the ICU. And if that means Stevie gets put into the
cold, cold ground, so be it.

When a character reaches Master Rank in a Type or
Quality, it cannot normally be improved further.

Discovery: Jefferson sold it, on purpose, to the Eyeless Guy. He knew
exactly what he was doing... but now he’s not happy he did it.

CONFLICT EXAMPLE 1

Type: Average [0] Dead Inside,

Let’s say that Kristov (Good [+2] Dirty Fighter) and
Jefferson (Expert [+4] Biker Dude) get into a fight.
Jefferson’s going to go first, since his fighting-relevant
Quality Rank is higher than Kristov’s.

Miscellany: Jefferson calls his Harley “Declaration,” and prefers denim to
leather.

Qualities: Expert [+4] Biker Dude, Good [+2] Toughness, Good [+2]
Outdoorsman, Poor [-2] Reader.
Soul Points Pool: 1

10

PDQ CORE RULES

©2004 Chad Underkoffler

JEFFERSON: “I punch at the little twerp.”

GM (to Jefferson): “Now what do you do?”

KRISTOV: “I’ll try to duck under the big moose’s punch.”

JEFFERSON: “I have a beer and wait for him to wake up, so
he can take back what he said about my momma. Or else.”

JEFFERSON (rolls 2d6+4; he rolls a 3 and a 1 for a total of 8):
“Eight!”

GM (to Kristov): After a couple minutes, you come around.
You’re still in continuing danger because Jefferson could
stomp your ass again. Roll 1d6 for Damage Recovery.”

KRISTOV (rolls 2d6+2; he rolls a 4 and a 5 for a total of 11):
“Eleven! Ha!”

KRISTOV (rolls 2d6; he rolls a 2 and a 4 for a total of 6): “Six
Ranks back... Hmm, I’ll put Dirty Fighter back to Good, that’s
1 to hit Poor and 2 more to get to Good, total of 3. Dead Inside
back to Average, that’s 1. Rockstar back to Good, that’s 2.
There, that should do it.”

GM: “Kristov bends down, and Jefferson’s punch misses the
mark. Kristov’s turn.”
KRISTOV: “I come up and try to sock him one in the nuts!”
JEFFERSON: “OOoooh, not cool, dude. Why do you always
go for the low-blow?”
KRISTOV: “My Quality is Dirty Fighter, sport.”

JEFFERSON (to Kristov): “Apologize for what you said about
my momma.”

JEFFERSON: “Well, I’ll try to parry his punch away from my
groin.”

KRISTOV: “Sorry! Don’t hit me again, okay?”

KRISTOV (rolls 2d6+2, he rolls a 4 and a 5 for a total of 11):
“This one goes to eleven! Heh heh heh!”

CONFLICT EXAMPLE 2

JEFFERSON (rolls 2d6+4; he rolls a 6 and a 3 for a total of 13):
“Thirteen. Guess it’s not your lucky day!”

Jimbo and Mike Matsutake are having a cook-off
Challenge in front of a live studio audience. (Sounds like a
social conflict to me.) The Scene opens on the set of
Monkeying with Food, Jimbo’s cable-access show. (Take
heed: this example includes MNPR:RPG's Mojo Powers!)

GM: “Jefferson knocks Kristov’s low-blow aside, easily.”
KRISTOV: “Gulp.”
JEFFERSON (miming cracking his knuckles): “This is gonna
hurt you a lot more than it hurts me, buddy.” (to GM) “I’m
gonna grab his shirt, throw him into the wall, and wind up
my haymaker. When he bounces back, I’ll connect. Hard.”

JIMBO OF THE JUNGLE, MONKEY CHEF

KRISTOV: “Hey, that’s more than one action!” (looks at GM)

Gift: Funny. Goal: Have Fun. Qualities: Average [0]
Monkey; Expert [+4] Rasslin’, Good [+2] Chef, Good [+2]
Brachiator, Poor [-2] Banana Addict. Mojo: 1M, 1N. CR:
1N.

JEFFERSON: “Nope, it’s Being Badass.” (looks at GM)
GM (ponders): “Yeah, that’s pretty badass. Jefferson gets an
Upshift on the attack.”
KRISTOV (buries his head in his hands): “This is gonna hurt.”
GM: “What’s your reaction to the attempt going to be?”

MIKE MATSUTAKE, NINJA CHEF

KRISTOV (has a bright idea): “I’m gonna Play It Cagey.”

Gift: Adept. Goal: Cause mischief. Qualities: Average [0]
Ninja; Good [+2] Chef, Good [+2] Katana, Good [+2]
Shuriken, Good [+2] Practical Joker, Poor [-2] Vain. Mojo:
1M, 1N. CR: 1M.

GM: “You know that’ll screw up your next attack.”
KRISTOV (ponders): “Nah, it’s not worth it. I need to tag this
guy a couple times, and I’ll need all the bonuses I can get. I
won’t Play it Cagey.”
GM: “Alright, Jefferson’s rolling against an effective Master
[+6] Biker Dude for this attack, or 2d6+6. Go for it.”
JEFFERSON (rolls 2d6+6; he rolls two 5s for a total of 16):
“Sweet sixteen, baby!”

JIMBO: “And that, studio audience and viewers at home, is
how you make a coconut omelet, or as the French call it, Oeufs
de Whack-kay!”

KRISTOV (rolls 2d6+2; he rolls a 1 and a 3 for a total of 6):
“Dammit. No go.”

GM: “The audience applauds – except for one guy, who’s
booing and hissing!”

GM (calculating, 16 minus 6 is a total of 10): “Jefferson throws
Kristov against the wall and clocks him on the return for 10
Damage Ranks.”

JIMBO: “What the–? Who’s trying to ruin my show?”
GM: “You see a Ninja stand up in the middle of the crowd.
He shouts to you “Go back to the Jungle, Monkey, and leave
the cooking to experts!”

JEFFERSON: “Take that, little buddy. Should’ve Played It
Cagey.”

JIMBO: “Jimbo starts bouncing up and down, beating his
chest, and says ‘Who the hell are you?’”

KRISTOV (glumly looking at his character sheet): “Well, I
could drop all my Goods to Averages, that’s 4 Damage Ranks.
Drop them all to Poors, that’s another 4. Two more... okay, I
drop my Average Dead Inside to Poor. That leaves one
Damage Rank, and everything I got is at Poor now. Crap. I’ll
take it on Dirty Fighter and bottom out. I’m unconscious.”

GM: “The Ninja says, ‘This skilled one is Mike Matsutake,
Ninja Chef! I Challenge you, Jimbo, to a duel of cuisine!’ The
audience seems to be holding its breath, waiting for Jimbo’s
response. . .”

11

PDQ CORE RULES

©2004 Chad Underkoffler

Rasslin’ will suffer a Breakdown. Damn. Well, better get it
over with.” (picks up dice, shakes them, then stops.) “Hey
wait, since this is a social conflict, I can use my Gift, right? Get
the audience on my side? Maybe their cheers of ‘Go, go,
Jimbo!’ and ‘Show me the monkey!’ keep me all focused and
stuff?”

JIMBO: “I accept your Challenge, Matsutake! Bring it on!”
GM: “The Ninja Chef leaps out of the stands, does a mid-air
somersault, and lands next to you on the stage. The audience
oohs and ahhs.” (makes a note) “Okay, this will be a social
Challenge, as you’re trying to get the highest amount of
audience applause through the dishes you produce. Sound
good?”

GM: “Sure, why not?”
JIMBO: “Cool. I’ll Upshift my Chef from Good [+2] to Expert
[+4].” (rolls 2d6+4-2, getting 5 and 6 for a total of 13) “Lucky
thirteen! Awesome!” (to the Ninja) “Though my eyes glaze
over and I start to drool over the Ninja’s luscious Super
Banana Sushi, I manage to pull myself away from the brink.”

JIMBO: “Sure.”
GM: “Since you both are equally-Ranked at Chef, I could
make you roll for Initiative, but since it’s Jimbo’s TV show, I
say he should go first.”
JIMBO: “Okay, I start to whip up a (um, what else do
Monkeys eat?). . . Got it! Termite pie! Jimbo gets a pie shell,
goes to the termite farm in the corner and scoops up a couple
handfuls of bugs, throws them in the shell, covers it, and
slams the tray into the oven! How does the crowd like that?”

GM: “Well done. You only take 2 Failure Ranks. Where are
you putting them?”
JIMBO (looking at sheet): “Okay, I’ll drop Rasslin’ voluntarily
– and temporarily! – from Expert [+4] to Average [0].”

GM: “Go ahead and roll.”

GM: “Your action.”

JIMBO: (rolls 2d6+2, getting 2 and 6 for a total of 10) “I got a
ten.”

JIMBO: (ponders) “Okay, I want to do something like the
Ninja did, combining my Qualities. Let’s see. . . Rasslin’,
Brachiator, and Chef. I got it! Okay, I’ll make fresh pancakes –
upside down, swinging from the light gantries of the studio, by
my feet!”

GM (rolling 2d6+2 for the Ninja, getting 2 and 2 for a total of
6): “Matsutake seems a bit flabbergasted by your use of
insects! He takes 4 Failure Ranks!” (The GM applies the
Failure Ranks, dropping Shuriken and Practical Joker 2 Ranks
each; now both are at Poor [-2].)

GM: “I like it! Okay, you can use Chef and Brachiator on this
action.”
JIMBO: (rolls 2d6+2+2, getting 4 and 5 for a total of 13)
“Thirteen again!”

JIMBO: “Don’t mess with the Monkey, man!”
GM (as the Ninja): “’Your jungle arts won’t save you from my
skills!’ And then he reaches down below the counter, grabs
something in each hand, and flips them into the air. He draws
his sword, screaming, ‘Behold the power of my. . . Super!
Banana Sushi!’ Using his katana, he deftly peels the banana,
slaps it onto the rice, then slices it into pieces which fall
perfectly on the serving plate.” (GM checks off the point of
Ninja Mojo from Matsutake’s write-up.)

GM (rolling 2d6+2, getting 1 and 2 for a total of 7) “Matsutake
gets seven, and takes 6 Failure Ranks.” (looks at sheet) “Six
Ranks will cause Matsutake to zero out a Quality, so that
means you win! The crowd goes wild, ‘Aaaaahhhh!’ while the
Ninja cries all over his sushi.” (scratches out the next to last
Mojo point on the Ninja’s sheet) “You feel the surge of power
as you gain one of the Ninja’s Mojo points for winning the
Challenge!”

JIMBO: “What the hell is that?”

JIMBO: “What Flavor?”

GM: “He’s using his Chef and Katana Qualities together, as
well as spending a point of Mojo on the Universal Power of
Super!”

GM: “Monkey Mojo.”
JIMBO: “’That will teach you to steal Mojo from Monkeys!’ I
scream, then I beat my chest, bouncing up and down, and
perform the traditional Monkey screech of ass-kicking
victory!”

JIMBO: “Damn.”
GM: “Yup, he’s pulling out all the stops, since you mussed
him pretty bad with your first attack. Oh, and you’re at -2 for
your reaction roll.”

GM: “Like how?”

JIMBO: “What?! Why?”

JIMBO: (demonstrates) “Like ‘ooh-ooh-ow-ow-ow!’”

GM: “Because Jimbo’s a filthy Banana Addict. That’s worth an
extra 2 Failure Ranks on the first attack.”

GM: (laughing) “Jimbo gets another new Monkey Mojo point.”
JIMBO: “Sweet!”

JIMBO (studies his character sheet) “Oh, right. That sucks.”
GM (rolling 2d6+2+2 for the two Qualities, plus an additional
Upshift – or +2, same difference – for the Ninja; he gets 2 and
5 for a total of 15): “13, plus 2 extra Failure Ranks is fifteen!”
JIMBO: “You’re kidding.” (studies sheet) “I only have 1 Mojo,
so I can’t use it for Bouncy!, because if I lose, my Expert [+4]

12

